D-. Sounds as in English but is never in final position. In verb forms, BE- is prefixed or initial d- changes to n-. In forms with prefix en-, d- may become t-, e.g., dudi, en-tudi, ngen-tudi.
da. For DI, at, in, by, 'ba, aba.
da'. 1. More: agi'd. (ka') di'? do you want any more?; ngembi' aku siti' d., aku agi' ka' makai, give me one more, I'm still hungry. 2. Almost, nearly, a little more and . . .: nyau ka' parai d., on the point of death; mimit d. aku (enda') laboh, I nearly fell; tepeda'd., just out of sight.
dabai. Fruit tree Canarium patentinervium Miq., KEDUNDONG. The fruit is soaked in water before being eaten.
dabal. 1. (Eng., 'double') Surcharge (on late payment of tax or fine): kena' d., be sur-charged, incur a surcharge, have to pay double; kena'd. lima' puloh peratus, incur a surcharge of 50 per cent. 2. Baju d., tweed or other European style jacket.
dabang. 1. (of a wound) Deep and wide, gaping, daba-d., nabang. 2. PEREGAM d., Pied Imperial Pigeon.
dabong. Tooth or notch in a serrated or saw-like edge, 'dog's tooth': d. bukit, one of several ridges or peaks on a hill; d. penyayat, tooth of a saw; d. ranggong, (poet.) the teeth (ngeli'), mouth; d. tangga', steps (notches) on a log ladder; d. ukir, serrated or dog-tooth work in carving; (poet.) ia nyaut enggau mulut d. landai, he answered from his mouth with its even teeth; daun tu' be-d., this leaf is serrated; ia nabong tangga', he cuts steps in a log (ladder), TANGKAL.
dacin. (Ch., dacing) Steelyard or weighbeam, (hence) any scales or weighing machine: batang d. , beam; buah d., weights; butoh d., pointer showing the balance; mata d., (inlaid brass) marks of the scale on wooden beam; kelia' menya ' Iban nadai nemu ngelala mata d., in the olden days Iban did not know how to read the scales. Untrue scales are either: d. angat, (hot) weighing light and favouring the trader (user) buying produce, or: d. celap, (cool) weighing heavy to the profit of the same trader when selling goods. Official checking of weights and measures, instituted about 1850, and the issue of measures to headmen have never prevented all cheating. Measures can be filled loose or tight, and a d. can be tilted by pulling one end of the cord loop by which it hangs. Few Iban have their own d.
dada. (M.) Chest, breast: (tulang) kerigai, ribs; lempuang, lungs; tusu, breasts; sangkal d., just above the heart; luak d., chest cavity. Body, TUBOH.
dadak. 1. Patch, mend: baju ia be-d., his coat is patched; ia nadak tancut aku, she patched my trousers; sida ' nadak jala, they are mending nets. 2. Feeble-minded. 3. Tree Artocarpus sp., BUKOH. 4. Antu D., female demon of the Kapuas able to change shape. She beguiled and captured Keling by appearing as KUMANG: the deception was revealed at a festival, when only the real Kumang was able to kill the pig (with a porcupine quill, bulu landak). 5. (in Undup) Tattoo (PANTANG) on the back of the hands, tegulun.
dadam. 1. Very cold, be cold and shivery: ujan ti' bangat sa-malam-malam ti' di-laban ia lalu nadamka ia, he was out in the rain all night and that made him chilled. 2. Demam d., Puerperal fever.
dadu. (Port.) Dice: main d., buai d., dicing; sida' bemain d., they are playing at dice. Games, main.
dadup. 1. Thud, redup, (hence) drum (GEN- uANG). 2. man's name: a famous augur of the Glu Ai (pupil of Busang).
daga'. 1. Old scar (abi) or mark. 2. Lump or mark of an insect bite, bclaga ', bclebaga '.
dagang. 1. (M., 'foreign') Trade: orang d., trader, (formerly) alien or stranger; ia be-d. j^la, he trades upriver; pama endar ia main be-d., he is a good business man; ia nagang gari', he deals in clothes; d. belalai, smugg-ling; Menteri D. enggau Gudang, Minister for Trade and Industry; Balai I)., Chamber of Commerce; Gawai D., Trade Fair. 2. man's name.
dagin. (M., daging) Meat, flesh; ia nisil d. ari tulang, she cuts the meat off the bones; d. isi', lean meat; d. lemak, fat meat.
dagong. 1. Boat built M. fashion with built-up sides edge-pegged: tu' d. ukai bong, this is a boat with planked sides, not a dug-out, PERAU'. 2. Wooden mallet used for driving in bamboo spikes to form a ladder on a bee-tree (tapang): kami tu' ngaga' d. laban ka' napang, we are making mallets for we are going to climb the tapang trees (for honey).
dagu'. Chin: ia betungkat d., he props his chin on his hands; bukit nya' be-d. ka tasik, that hill juts into the sea; d. daun biru', beti- bang di kuyu', his chin (wags like a) biru' leaf, his (only) store is in his cheeks (of a man forever talking but never doing anything).
dai. 1. (M., dahi) Forehead, (usu. poet, for) kemng: d. ia manah, her brow is lovely. 2. RETAK d., an ancestor spirit.
dai'. Di ai', by or in the water, daja'. Hawk, peddle, jaja: ia naja ' (or be-d.) sayur, he hawks vegetables.
dajap. 1. Bow or stern part of a boat (perauj, cf. ajup(?). 2. Keen or sharp (tajam), esp. of the knife used by manang in pelian rites.
dak. Phlegm, mucus, sputum: ia batok enda bc-d., he has a dry cough: insak, nasal mucus.
dakah. 1. Ebb tide at its lowest: tenang, lepong, of flood tide. 2. Dirt, scum and flot-sam left by receding tide, cf. daki': baru datai d., the tide has turned; d. rekong, (of an un-washed neck) 'tide-mark'.
daki'. (M.) Dirt or stain on the skin, cf. dakah: ia ngunsut d. ia, he scrubbed the dirt off (him-self), KUTUR.
dalam. 1. (M.) Deep: ai' d., deep water; runding ia d., he is sensible, judicious, thought-ful; ia ngenalamka telaga, he made the pool deeper; penalam lubok nya' tiga depa', the depth of that pool is three fathoms; jako ' d., deep saying, hard saying. 2. (M.) In, into, in-side, usu. ALAM: bai' ia ka d. rumah, take him into the house; runding hati aku d. nyin nya ' salah, in my heart of hearts I think it wrong. 3. However (much): d. deka'pen nuan ngereja nya', enti' apai enda' sagi, anang ga', however much you want to, don't do it if your father doesn't allow it.
dalang. Labu' d., gourd, unid. daloh. Small valley, low place or depression (liable to flood), lebak: D. laloh sangkoh, d. pun buloh, the vale of many spears, the vale of bamboos (in Sebayan, abode of those who died in hunting or trapping accidents).
dam. 1. (D.) Game of draughts. Games, main. 2. Trees Cleistanthus spp.: C. baramicus Jabl.; C. winkleri Jabl.
damai. Word used much in pengap chants, meaning unid., (for di-amai, truly?).
damar. 1. (M.) Resin, KE LASAU, trade name for a natural exudation from trees (mostly of Dipterocarp spp., esp. Sliorea spp.): d. batu, d. dagin, resins of poor quality but abundant, collected from the ground or from swamp after locating the lumps with iron probes (cirok), used for caulking (KERUIN) and for export; d. luis, d. mata kucing, (and in Baleh) bulu ', high quality resins of a clear pale colour, got by tapping trees of Hopea spp. and carried for sale in conical bark containers (bumbong) or bark boats (utap). D. KELULUT is a dark wax made by bees. Oleo-resins are called minyak, e. g., minyak keruin. 2. (hence) D. itam, class of resinous timber trees Shorea spp., LUN. D. itam daun nipis, S. faguctioides Ashton, and d. itam gundul, S. dolichocarpa V. SI., are hardwoods (barik).
dambak. (M., damak) Blowpipe dart, LAJA'.
dambar. For DAMAR, resin.
dampa'. 1 Temporary longhouse built by a group of families farming contiguous land (dan- dang umai) at a distance from the main long- house (rumah), to avoid building separate langkau umai: kami be-d. antara menoa, we have a farmhouse on the edge of our lands (i.e., where our lands march with the menoa of the next main longhouse). Often all the people spend a farming season dispersed in d. and langkau, returning to the main house only for major rituals. Disputes over division of the menoa may arise when a d. becomes perma-nent and breaks off from the main house. 2. man's name.
dampar. (M.) Driven ashore, stranded, wrecked.
dampih. (M.) damping, dampir. Near, close, semak: aku diau d. ia, I live near him; ia d. mati, he is close to death, BEDUNDONG.
Damu. (or Rukok) Son-in-law of Serapoh, husband to Remi and father of MENGGIN, who taught the customs relating to widow-hood (balu), dreams (mimpi), and warfare (kayau).
damun. Farmed land lying fallow over which rights are claimed, TANAH.
dan. (M., dahan) Branch, bough: kayu' nya' maioh d., that tree has many branches; sibau kami bedau be-d., our sibau tree has not yet (grown) branches; kayu' tu' laun be-d., this tree has no low branches; d. pintu kayu', lowest branch of a tree.
Dana. D. Bayang, leader in the Saribas in mid 19th c., father of Reltaya Nanang, Buda and Aji. On a foray to Sambas he got an iron gun, afterwards called Bujang TIMPANG Berang.
danan. Largest kind of rotan, WI semambu: bisi' maioh d. di Dor, there is plenty of d. at Dor.
danau. 1. (M.) Lake, natural pond, shallow pool, land flooded permanently or for long periods at regular intervals: cf. LEPONG. 2. D. Kapuas, D. Selimbau, the Kapuas Lakes. These provide fish and flood padi lands. The Lakes came into being when one of the Seven Sisters (BINTANG Banyak) fell, broke, and scattered there as water. Dual penebat D. Selimbau, the youth who dammed up the Kapuas Lakes, i.e., BUNGAI Nuing, the strong man and practical joker of Panggau. 3. (Eng.) D. Formation, geological fault that runs along the Batang Lupar to the Lakes and SSE into Kalimantan. 4. D. Alai, teleba'enggau Sebayan bumai sukat punggai leletan puang, the River D. Alai, where the Dead are wont to make their farms measured with the end of a heddle rod (so small a space yields padi in plenty for them).
dandan. 1. (M.) Platform on a war-boat (PERAU' pengayau), fighting deck, gun deck. 2. DANDI, song.
dandang. 1. (of spaces or areas) Joined, con-tiguous in a series: umai kami be-d., our farms are in a continuous stretch; kami bumai SA-D., we farm next to one another; umai sida'enda' be-d., their farm is separate (from the rest), DUNDONG. 2. num. cl. for farms {umai).
dandi. 1. (Hind., dondi, 'small drum') Song, sing sitting in a swing (wa '), BE-D., dandan. 2. Tree of riverbanks in headwaters Termi- nalia phellocarpa (?). 3. D. liat, tree with poi-sonous fruit found only in Sebayan, which may never be cut. Keling alone cut at it once, when Kumang was discovered to have had an affair with Ijau Jegalang.
dandong. 1. Long skirt, sarong, tajong: mdu' Kedayan be-d. baka indu ' Laut, Kedayan women wear long skirts as Malay women do. 2. Shawl or stole, cotton sarong worn over the shoulder.
dang. Hot, cf. angat: tuboli ia d.-d., he is feverish; ia nang jan ngagai api, he warms his hands at the fire; ia be-d., he sits warming him-self, (kindu ', diang); batu pe-nang, heated stone for giving warmth, 'hot water bottle'.
dangai. (poet.) Mythical animal, unid.
dangau. (M.) Shelter, temporary hut, dunju', jungap, (in sampi) deprecatory term for a house, LANGKAU.
dani. Awake: ia nyau d. (tindok), he is awake, has awakened (from sleep); anali ia bedau d., her child is still awake; penginggar nyawa ia nanika aku, his loud voice woke me up; (mam) d. pagi, first thing in the morning; GERAK, rouse.
Danjai. Hero of a myth who finds himself trapped in the house of the 'Tiger' (Antu REMAUNG). In one version he is seeking the killer of his wife and finds her head in the house of Remaung. For revenge, and because he has no other means of escape, he kills Remaung. He finds out from the sister (or daughter) that Remaung can only be killed with his own sword: this he borrows on a pre-text and takes Remaung's head with it. He marries the 'sister' and brings her home. She brings amulets to render the wearer invisible when at war, and teaches men not to take fruit or anything desirable found on the stumps of fallen trees because it will only be bait laid by antu for men.
danjan. (usu. poet.) Dead, die, PARAI: aku nyabakka menyadi' aku ke nyau d., I weep for my brother who has died.
danjang. 1. Oppose, conflict with: kami dua be d., we (two) have conflicting views; ia nan- jang runding kami, he opposed our proposal. 2. Beautiful, shapely: indu' nya'd. bendar, she has a beautiful figure; (poet.) baka lemidin d., lovely as the climbing fern.
danji. (M., janji) Agreement: berapa d. siduai? how much did you agree on?; aku nadai d. gawa ' ngelama ' nya ', I didn't agree to work as long as that; kami duai be-d., we have an agree-ment, PEKAT.
dansin, dansing. (Eng.) Dance, dancing (wes-tern style). Iban dance, ajat.
daoh. For DAUH, echo, distant sound.
dapat. 1. (M., 'get, manage to') (usu. of the elderly or sick) In good health, well, active: ia agi'd., he is still active, well (for his age); ia apin d., he isn't quite well yet, (cf. suman)-, ia enda' d., he is unwell (i.e., unable to live and work as usual). 2. PENAPAT, as ... as possible.
dapun. For DUPAN, large (of boars).
dapur. (M.) Hearth, fireplace for cooking: bilik d., kitchen. The d. with drying rack (PARA') used to be in the tempuan bilik, but is now often at the back (luan) or in a separate room with the floor at a slightly different level. The d. in the tempuan is between the door and the tiang pemun of the next family bilik. It has its own supports direct from the ground for the board box filled with clay on which the fire is made. Being of earth, the d. is under the charge of Pulang Cana. Cooking pots used to be set on three stones (bedilang) or on ring tripods (tungku '), but nowadays iron bars (bas) or angle-irons are laid right across. The woman who is cooking {berapi, pandok, sumai) usu. has a low bench or stool. She sits near the d. and does not have her own meal until the men have finished, unless the meal is an ordinary one for the immediate family. Celap d., offence against the house committed by letting the d. remain cold for too long (a fortnight or a month according to local custom). This is said to have been instituted by Jelian, and is a means of securing that members keep in touch and do not disperse. Long, unexplained absence from the community raises the suspicion that the offender has moved elsewhere without paying the enselan (or penti), and disaster or disease may afflict the people if the 'fine' is not paid.
dara. 1. (Skr., adara) Young woman, un-married woman, maiden, {bujang of men): endun baru angkat d., (my) daughter is just growing up (becoming a woman); d. benong, d. biak, 'sweet seventeen'; d. bungas, virgin; d. madai, divorced woman who has had a child; d. ninggal, divorced woman; d. periok, woman past her first youth but unmarried, spinster 'on the shelf'; d. tuai, young woman who has remained single rather long (not yet d. periok)-, indu' nya' minta'd., that woman asks to be (pronounced) unmarried (e.g., when deserted and the husband cannot be found); tengah han d., middle of the morning (full day, about 9 a.m., but not yet hot). 2. (of women) Smart: ia ngenaraka diri', she made herself smart.
dara-darup. DARUP, rumbling.
darah. 1. (M.) Blood, bleed: telih ia be-d., ms wound is bleeding; cl. getah, (blood relation of younger generation), blood, stock, race; lnggt'd., high blood pressure. 2. Red sap of some trees, esp. kumpang. uarat. (M.) Land as opp. to river or sea: ia di d., kami di perau', he was on land and were in the boat; ari penyangkai dia' kami be-d. kulu, from the landing place there we went upstream by land; aku pulai be-d., I am returning overland; sida' niki' ka d., they went ashore; enda' ulih di-pe-d.-ka kin, you can't get there by land. Land, soil, tanah; water, ai'.
darong. Narrow valley, gorge, lebak, parong.
daru'. For BE-D., tree Cantleya sp.
darup. Crash, rumble, derut: aku ninga d. punggu' rebah, I heard the crash of a dead tree falling; ia ninga utai be-d., he heard some-thing crash; dara-d., d.-d., thudding, rumbling, crashing.
dasan. 1. Place, spot, position, pam, alai, endur. 2. (poet.) term of reference avoiding use of personal name, sanu '.
dasu. 1. Kain d., kind of velvet. 2. Dark green or blue of cloth: kanggan d. sa-puntang, length of dark cloth.
datai. 1. (M., datang) Come, arrive, reach, send, bring: ia d. di rumah aku tengah malam, he came to my house at midnight; kebun ngenataika wang, gardens bring in money; ia udah d. di Sibu, he had arrived in Sibu; ia nataika berita ngagai kami, he saw that the news reached us; ke-d.-ka utai tu' ngagai ia, inform him of this; penatai, arrival; d. bulan, d. kain, d. kutur, menstruate. 2. D.-ka, until, as far as, nyentok: ari mit d.-ka besai ia badas, from (his) youth until manhood he was good; aku enggai bejako' enggau ia d.-ka mati, I will never talk to him until I die; ia belawa' ari Sabu d.-ka Simanggang lalu enda' ngetu, he ran from Sabu as far as Simanggang without stopping. 3. D. hari d. Injat dudok dia', day after day Injat came and sat there.
datang. (M.) DATAI, come.
datas. Di ATAS, above, over, upon, on: d. pala', above the head; d. tikai, on the mat; ia dudok d., he sits in the place of honour (i.e., against the outer wall of the ruai facing the door of the bilik).
datu'. 1. (M.) (poet.) Nobleman, chief. 2. orig. a title borne by local Malay rulers in the early 19th c.: cf. TEMENGGONG. It became a title bestowed by the Rajah upon Malays he wished to honour.
Dau. Tributary of the Ketungau in which the Engkerbang or Dor people took refuge from Skrang and Saribas raiders. They were recalled by the Rajah about 1850 and have since lived on each side of the Kelingkang range.
dauh. Sound heard a long way off, (H., echo): d. tasik, the sound of the sea; ukai orang ngangau nya' mina d. nyawa orang sa- belah kampong, that isn't people calling (to us) but merely the sound of voices in the forest.
daun. 1. (M.) Leaf, page (of book), blade (of knife), sheet (of paper), card: bed., have leaves; d. layu' nyau rarah, the withered leaves fall; d. apt, flame; api be-d., the fire flames; d. insap, wrapper leaf for tobacco; d. itit, plant like 'Japanese canna' with edible leaves and bunches of small triangular fruit at the foot; d. nanti' hati, (M.) Coleus (coloured leaf plant grown as garden or pot plant and used in treatment of coughs); d. pait, d. tubu', wild leaves used as flavouring with fish, unid.; d. puki' temuai, kind of small Bauhinia, daup belaki; d. terup, playing cards; be-main d., play cards. 2. Ular d., Whip Snakes Dryophis spp., MERESIAN. 3. Pantak d., Lesser Green Leaf-bird\pantok d., Green Broadbill.
daup. 1. Attack (as a fighting cock), strike (as a snake): anakbiak be-d.-ka daun, children set on with leaves (on sticks, a game of 'cock-fighting'). 2. Agree, consent, reach agreement: ia naup aku beselam, he agreed to dive with me: (hence?) challenge. 3. (M., dc-d.) D. belaki, small plants of Bauhinia spp. If a man hides a leaf at his waist before entering a house he will see more than he should when a woman sits down.
dawa. (Ar., 'sue at law') Nawa), report, inform on: ia nawaka aku ti' udah nubai, he reported me for tuba-fishing; ia nawaka penyalah aku, he reported my misdemeanour; ia udah pe-d. ka aku ngagai pengulu, I had reported him to the chief; orang ke empu d., plaintiff, com-plainant.
dawah-dawah. Wide open: moa penyawan kami d., our window is wide open.
dawai. (Minangkabau M.) Wire, kawat: d. duri', barbed wire; ia melongka d., he bent the wire.
dawat. (Ar.) Ai' d., ink.
daya. 1. (M.) Means, way, dodge: ia ngiga' d. ngelepaska diri', he sought a means of es-cape; nadai d. nadai kira ngidupka diri', I don't know which way to turn for a liveli-hood; kami be-d.-ka lapar ngagai ia sa-taun tu', we turned to him in our famine this year; kini tua be-d.-ka api? where are we to get a light?; ia be d. ngulihka bini, he used magic to get a wife, GAYA, JALAI. 2. Barat d., south-west; selatan d., south-east.
Daya'. Dayak, (formerly) Dyak: bansa D., of Dayak race; D. Baku, Paku Dayaks, IBAN. (W.) D. means 'up-country' or 'inland': e.g., Kedayan (Ke-d.-an), a people living in and near Brunei. In Kalimantan the Dutch called all pagan upriver people D.: D. Kayan, Kayan; D. Batang Lupar, Iban. In Swk., D. can mean Sea Dayak [Iban) or Land Dayak (Bidayuli). The latter live inland and do not use boats much: the former are a river people who used to put to sea with Malays as priates. 'Sea Dayak' may represent si-d., the inland people, the D. Both usu. call themselves by the river or place where they live. Both migrated north-wards into Swk.
dayang. 1. (M., 'girl, maid at court') title of Malay women of rank equivalent to ABANG, polite term of address to Malay women. 2. (poet.) honorific title of women, esp. deities: e. g., D. Kumang, D. Raca. 3. woman's name.
dayau. Ke-d. ke-d., a few scattered about, sparsely (?).
dayoh. Waddle (as a duck or an old woman): baka d. tekura', like a tortoise waddling; tekura' be-d. nengah kerangan, a tortoise is waddling over the shingle.
dayong. 1. (M.) Oar, row: ia landik endar be-d., he is a good oarsman; Laut nya' nayong kami ka saberai, that Malay rowed us across the river; tangkal umbong kila-kilap baka pantap kayoh d., his fin is hidden, then rolls into sight for a moment and down again, (with a sound) like the chop and swish of an oar blade (i.e., porpoise or dolphin). Ibans use paddles (sen- gayoh) and punt poles (suar). Malays use d. with long straight blade and a T-piece on the end of the oar-loom. The d. is hung by a strop of yarns (galas) from the forward side of a thole-pin (keliki). The rower stands and pushes by leaning forward, moving one foot to throw his weight in. The blade is twisted and returned through the water. 2. (Kayan, Bidayuh, etc.) Woman 'shaman', manang or lemambang.
de. 1. (spelling used in the Rejang) for DI', you (2nd person singular). 2. for DI, at, in, by.
debu. 1. Fine dust, powder, dedak: d. bungai, (fallen) pollen. 2. (of midges, flies) Swarms, clouds: d. lalat nutu bangkai ular, clouds of flies are after the dead snake; lalat be-d. ba tikai nya', flies are swarming over that mat. 3. D.-d., suddenly: ia d.-d. rarika aku, he rushed away from me.
debus. (M., 'rushing or swishing sound') Ai' deba-d., the water rushes (past or through).
ded-. form of reduplication of initial d-\ cf. tet-, lei--, for di-, can convey the passive sense.
dedabang. Obvious, evident: utang d. tunggu enda' lalu, the offence (debt) is clear (but) the payment for it is not forthcoming.
dedak. (M.) Dust, powder, debu: d. berau, rice bran (i.e., the finer sort after pounding and sieving), abok: d. ba pumpun puak bungai, pollen on the stamen of a flower.
dedanggai. 'Cry out' when singing pelandai, sanggai, etc. It is usu. to cry ngaili on a rising note at the beginning of a 'verse'.
dedanggang. Hung up, unsettled: reban kami d. magang, all our felled trees are hung up (on their branches or one another so the trunks do not lie on the ground); pendiau ia d. ditu', he hasn't settled down here for good.
dedangkang. Squat or kneel with hands on knees, kneel or crawl (ragau) on all fours, DUDOK.
dedas. num. cl. for mats, lengths of cloth not made up: berapa d. Idas nuan? how many idas mats have you?; pua' kumbu' baru tembu' sa-d., the figured cloth is finished (i.e., woven but not yet cut and sewn to make the breadth); kain sa-d., skirt length (before the ends are sewn together to make it up for wearing); tikai d., mat with the edge-plait unfinished (?).
dedat. 1. Strike (with a stick), beat, palu': ia nedat bclakang aku, nya' kabuah aku nunggu ia, he beat me on the back, that's why I fined him; anang be-d.-ka tikai agi', don't go on beating on the mat. 2. Packed, crammed in (as things in a box),padat. dedegong. Roaring (as a tiger), degong.
dedekut. (M., 'decoy call for pigeon') Calling together (as a hen does her chicks), clucking.
dedengong. Open, uncovered (as a hole in a tree or the mouth of a gun).
dedepan. (poet.) Very, extremely, dedinggai. Perched high, balancing on top, dinggai.
dedugau. Sit quietly doing nothing, day-dream, dugau.
dedui. Cry loudly: ia nyabalt d. di malam, he cried out last night: cf. dui-dui.
dedunga', dedunggok. Sitting idly, dunga', dugau.
degak. Disrespectful, off-hand.
degi. Erect, straight: dudok d., sit up (straight); d. batang kayu' nya', the trunk of that tree is straight; ia negika pala' ia, he raised his head: cundong, leaning. Cf. cegai.
degok. (M., 'gulping sound') Angle between chin and throat (geru'): munsoh di-pantap ia lalu kena' d., he cut at the foe and got him under the jaw.
degong. Dege-d., de-d., reverberate, roar: nyawa ia d. ngangauka aku ari lubang batu, his voice echoed in the cave as he called me.
deh. Particle denoting emphasis: sapa nama nuan d.? and what's your name?; nama ia d.? what on earth is it?; jauh d., it's a pretty long way; jalai jauh d. dia', that way is long; aku nadai duit, sa-scn d. nadai, I've no money, not even a cent; anang guai dulu'd., wait just a minute.
dei'. (S., di' with long vowel) Particle ex-pressing dismay or pity: naka meh ulih tu\ d.-d.! oh dear! it's too much for me; ia be-d.-d. berundingka anak ia ke nyau nurun ngayau, she was anxious for her son who had gone to war.
dejal. Stopper, cork, stop up (nejal, nijal), caulk: dini d. balang nya'? where's the cork of that bottle?
deka'. 1. (usu. shortened to KA' in speaking) Want, wish for, be willing, let, allow: ia d. bejual kebun ia, he is willing to sell his garden; aku d. makai, I am hungry; sida' d. nulong nuan, they want to help you\aku d. empu bup nya', I want (to have) that book; anang d. di- tundi' sida' pasal pengawa' kami, don't let them pump you about our business; ia neka'-ka diri' bemain, he pretended he wanted to play; ia ncka' nya', bejalai ngelaban panas, he's al-ways wanting to walk in the sun; peneka' hati nuan meh, just as you like; (nuan) tau'seneka' hati, you may (do) as you like; enda' tau' ngempok tanah perai, enda' tau' be-d.-ka orang enggai, you can take a horse to water but you can't make him drink (lit., you can't mould loose earth, you can't make an unwilling per-son willing). 2. Agree to marry (S., but gen.) desire for or attraction by the opposite sex: aku d.-ka ia, I am willing to marry (or, I want) her (him); ni orang d.-ka nuan, nobody'll look at you twice, nobody will have you.
dekih. Significant cough, cough to attract attention: ia nekih me da' aku mansa', he gave a cough when I passed by.
dekoh. 1. Part below the wrist, end of fore-arm next the wrist: cf. dekuan. 2. (as a measure, SUKAT) Less by a hand and wrist than a 'fathom' (depa').
dekuan. Wrist, ketekuan, TUBOH.
delapan. (M.) Eight, sclapan, usu. LAPAN.
delima. (Skr.) Buah d., Pomegranate Punica granatum.
demam. 1. Fern Gleichenia linearis Barm., (M.) resam. The fibres inside the main stem are used for making turks-head lashings and bands on scabbards, etc., and the common black bracelets worn on the wrist and, by men, below the knee, (tumpa', unus). Gen. for ferns, paku'. 2. (M.) Fever, feverish, penyakit angat: d. celap angat, malaria; d. dadam, puerperal fever.
demaram. Bruise: d. ia keleti', his bruise is black, LETT, MALUI.
dembi. (M., dembai) Dembc-d., (of girls) lumpish, slouching, ungainly.
demeram. 1. Deep loud groan, groan loudly (as in acute pain): ia nadai bisi' tindok, be-d. sa-malam-malam, he did not sleep but groaned he whole night. 2. (of cows, capi) Low, lowing.
demoh. Groan, sigh: nya'd. capi indu' nyau ka' parai, that is the groan of a cow that is dying; ia be-d. alam hati, he sighed in his spirit.
Demong. 1. Son of Entingi, Baketan chief of the Saribas, who married Rinda, daughter of the Iban invader, TINDIN. When Rinda died, D. married Lemia, a Baketan, whose descend-ants moved into the Julau. The great stone, Batu D., in the Ulu Krian was set up by D. as a boundary mark between the lands given to each of his two families. 2. Ulup d., a title of Tutong, brother of Keling.
dempa'. Usu. pron. of di-EMPA', eaten, eatable.
dempam. Dempe-d., be-d., (of fire) blazing or roaring, demurong.
dempar. Flat (of forehead or back of head).
Dempi. Legendary war leader who fought the Bugau. When he invited MERIPAT to celebrate a victory, Lang impersonated Meripat and re-fused to enter the house without a proper ritual. Lang and his people demonstrated this and finally departed in their proper bird- shapes. Another version shows Lang curing his hosts of sickness and teaching various rites (of manang?). A similar story, told in the Skrang, tells how Keling and others from Panggau appeared or departed in their own snake-forms.
dempok. D. RIAN, sweetmeat of durian.
demurong. (of fire) Blaze, roar, dempam.
dendam. (M.) Grudge, feud, be spiteful.
dendan. Cross-piece, T-piece: d. kibong, rods put through loops or tied at top of mosquito net each end to hang it by and keep it spread; d. senapang, ramrod; d. sengayoh (dayong), the top hand-hold of paddle (oar).
dendang. 1. (M.) Crow, burong gegak, KAK. 2. Apai D., Iban leader of the 19th c. 3. (M.) Small beetles of Cantliaris spp., used (West Malaysia, at least) with areca to treat menstrual disorders and gonorrhoea and as a powder in food against poison affecting the kidneys.
dengah. Victim, head trophy: berapa d. nuan? how many have you killed (or, heads have you taken)?; ia empai be-d., he has not yet taken a head.
denggu'. D.-d., (of sounds) distant, faint: ia d.-d. nyabak, (you can hear) her wailing some-where.
dengki. (M.) Envy, malice, spite: ia d.-ka aku, he is envious of me; d. kami mansang, our ill- feeling is growing.
dengo. D.-d., (of an opening) wide: lubang nya'd., that hole is a big one.
dengong. (M.) Humming (as of insects), ren- gong: aku ninga d. manyi', I heard the hum of bees; nyamok denga-d., mosquitoes are buzzing about.
dengut. (M.) Murmur, grunt, whine, squeal (as young pigs), any protesting sound: d. ia di- dinga kami, we heard her murmuring; anak ia denga-d., her child is grizzling; ia nyabak de-d., he sobs.
denjang. 1. Stand or sit close beside or in front of a person. 2. Be-d., climax of the PENGAP in which the lemambang joins the group of deities gathered round the givers of the gawai. The lemambang sings (nenjang) to the man and to the woman of the house: he explains who is sitting each side of them in the group, and sings the handing over by the deities of their gifts of amulets (BATU). D. is chiefly addressed to the woman at a.gawai batu, and to the man at a gawai kenyalang.
denjing. 1. Really, absolutely, enjing. 2. for dandang, contiguous (?).
depa'. (M., depa) Span of the arms out-stretched (between tips of middle fingers), fathom: d. aku, my span, my 'fathom'; sa-d. Perintah anam kaki, an official (Government Standard) fathom is six feet; ia nepa'-ka jari, he stretches his arms out, ENTEPA'. Cf. berap. Gen. for measures, sukat. D. is used for the length of boats, width of bilik (usu. 3), lengths of cane, rope, etc., and gen. where Eng. mea-sure is in yards (ila).
deram-deram. (M.) Groan, growl, low rumble.
deras. (M.) (of movement) Fast, rapid, swift, quick: d. bendar orang nya' bejalai, that man walks very fast; aku ngeneraska pejalai diri' meda' hari nyau malam, I quickened my pace when I saw it was beginning to get dark; jako' sida' Baled d. endar, the speech of the Baleh people is very rapid; d. perau' nya', that boat is swift;peneras ai' dia' enda' ulih tanjak, you can't go upstream there because of the speed of the current; anang neraska perau', don't paddle (too) hard, JAMPAT.
derian. (M., berian) Marriage payment made by the man (Paku and Lower Saribas only), engkerian, (pern-)berian, ANTARA.
derisa. (Eng.) Dresser, Medical Orderly, Hos-pital Assistant, (sometimes) physician or doctor: d. jelu, Veterinary Officer, LUTOR. Before 1941, d. were given two years' training by qualified doctors in general practice before being sent out to Districts on their own. Since 1946 they have been trained by nurses and called Hospital Assistants.
dero, deror. (Eng.) Draw, paint, lukis: pen- gawa'd., drawing, art.
deru. (M.) Roar, growl, derut.
derup. (Eng.) Drop (in sense of supplying troops in the field by air): muai d., make an air drop, supply rations, etc., by parachute (peresut).
deruroh. Drumming or roaring sound, gemu- roh: ujan munyi ke-d., the rain is drumming down.
derut. (M.) Rumble, growl (as thunder), darup, deru: aku ninga guntur d.-d., I heard thunder rolling.
di. 1. (M.) (of relative position) At, in, on, de: d. belakang, behind; d. moa, in front; d. baroh, below; d. atas, datas, on top, above; d. ulu, dulu, upriver; d. menoa, at home, in one's own district; ia d. bilik, he's in his room; d. malam, last night, in the night: cf. aba. 2. (prefixed to a verb, forms the passive) Anak kami nadai kala ' d.-palu ', our children are never beaten; (prefixed to a verb with ke, forms an adjective or participle) aku meri' ka nuan naka ti' d.-ke-bisi' aku, I give you what 1 have (lit., as far as is with me). In writing and translation the passive may be formed with d.-pe-: enti' d.-pe-bandingka enggau, if compared with, in comparison with. In speaking, KENA' is often used to form the passive or the adjectival form is shortened: ia kena' palu' ulih laki ia, he was beaten up by her husband; utai ke-bisi' aku ngembi'di', what I have I give you.
di'. 1. You (2nd person singular), de. In Upper Rejang and Ulu Ai, d. is used instead of NUAN except in poetry: the Balau and Undup (H.) use d. to women but nuan to men: elsewhere nuan is gen. used for either sex. In colloquial speech, the pronoun is often omitted and another term of address added: udah mandi', dom? had a bath, lad?; agi' ka' makai, wai? any more to eat, wai? 2. for DEI' expressing dismay.
dia'. 1. There, in that place, at that point, then: engkah d., put it there; d. di', stand still, stand over there; d. ia ninga anak mit nyabak, then (or, there) he heard a baby crying; d. ia nyebut rega, then (at that point) he mentioned the price; d. pen, no, thank you. 2. When. . . then. . .: d. aku betemu enggau ia, d. aku meri', when I meet him I'll give (it) to him. 3. Diatu ' (d.-tu'), now, this minute: d.-tu' ia? (is it) now?; maia d.-tu' ia datai kaman', it was this time yesterday when he came; dalam ka d.-tu', at this time, up to now, as of now.
diam. (M.) For DIAU.
dian. (M.) Candle: ia gawa' betenggauka d., he works by the light of a candle.
diang. (M.) Dry, toast, warm, heat, dang: ia be-d., he is warming himself (by a fire); ia niang kelambi' ia di api, he is drying his coat at the fire: cf. kindu'.
di-ati-ati. Think of, keep in mind, di-hati: d. aku nuan sekumbang nuan ti' ngasu', I have always thought of you since (that time when) you went hunting.
diatu'. Dia'-tu', now.
diau. 1. (M., diam) Be still, be silent, stop, soothe: d. nuan, d. meh, d. dia'! be still! be quiet!; ia enggai d. nyawa, she never stops talking; ia ngcn-d.-ka anak ia nyabak, she soothed her crying child, she stopped her child crying. 2. Dwell, stay, live: aku d. ba tisi ai', I live at the water's edge; ia d. enggau aku tiga hari, he stayed with me for three days; siduai ia d. enggau lantang selama'-ia, they lived happily ever after; ia ngena' gari'd. ia, he is wearing his everyday clothes. 3. D. (diri'), stay at home, keep to the house, keep to one-self, lead a quiet life, be all right (undisturbed): umai kami d. diri', our farm is all right (i.e., no pests); kami d.-(diri')ka burong, we stayed at home because of the omen; burong jai' niauka kami, a bad omen kept us at home; ke-d.-ka mimpi nuan nya', stay at home on account of that dream of yours. PEN-D.
didi. (H.) Lullaby: be-d., sing a lullaby.
diding. Niding, beat, palu '.
didis. Breast of a bird, adup: nyamai d. burong nya' dempa', the breast of that bird is delicious.
didit. Nidit, strike with a stick, beat into shape, PALU'.
digir. For DIJIR, put in a row.
dijap. 1. Growth on land in the second or third successive year of fallow after farming, (in 2nd Div.) KERUKOH, TANAH. 2. Interval between: mimit nadai be-d., sa-tempap nadai be-lapang, not the slightest space, not ahand's- breadth of a gap (between lalang grass on the way to Sebayan).
dijir. 1. Put in a row: ia nijirka pucong, he put the bottles in a row; kami be-d., we formed a line, BARIS. 2. (in Paku) Formally to seat guests in order according to rank at a gawai, after which drink is served (sibur).
dik. (Eng.) Deck, usu. as seen from below, esp. a ceiling in a room.
di-ke-bisi'-ka. Have, possess, in possession, (formation with di- and bisi', usu. at end of sentence): Iban endang maioh macant "nscra d., the Iban have all sorts of tales.
dikin. Small knife or matchet (DUKU') such as women use.
dilah. 1. (M., lidah) Tongue: butoh d., uvula; d. ruding, tongue of jew's-harp; d. papan, tongue of (tongue-and-groove) board; baka idong antara mata, baka d. antara nyawa, as the nose between the eyes, as the tongue be-tween the jaws (of a go-between or inter-mediary); indai aku ari menoa d. tanah, my mother comes from an out-of-the-way place, DILAT, SANTA. 2. Kayu'd. (or sai), trees of Polyalthia spp. (PENEPAN). 3. D. kendawang, a poisonous fungus; d. kcpayang, an edible fungus: fungus, kulat. 4. D. rusa', red 'tongue' of inflammation on arm or leg when the poison of a wound on hand or foot begins to move upward in the bloodstream, symptom of such blood poisoning associated with the feverish stage (alar) of filariasis.
dilak. 1. D. BEDONG, narrow girdle (show-ing gap between it and the wearer's skirt?). 2. Dila-d., (of a wound) long and gaping.
dilang. LIMAU d., Pomelo.
dilasai. For dilah sai, trees of Polyalthia spp., PENEPAN.
dilat. (Jav.) Lick, lap: ukui nya' nilat kakiia, that dog licked his foot; mayau nilat ai', the cat laps the water; anak aku nilat sudu ', my child licked the spoon; nyau nilat tekuyong, the baby is beginning to feel at home now (lit., the snail has begun to lick, i.e., come out of its shell), DILAH.
dimbam, dimbu. Wrap, shawl, long scarf: pua ' tu' ka d. aku, this cloth will do as a wrap for me; ia be-d.-ka kain basalt, he is wrapped in a damp cloth.
dimokerasi. (Eng.) Democracy: adat d., demo-cratic way of life (or procedure).
din. Yonder, (over) there: d. rumah sida' sa- piak tanjong, their house is over there beyond the bend of the river; datai ia d., lalu Iiaja nanya'-ka pejalai ia, when she got there, the Rajah asked the purpose of her journey: cf. dia', nyin. Giving a direction is often accom-panied by a toss of the chin to avoid pointing.
dindang. (M.) Song: tukang d., singer at a Malay style dance (TANDA'); ia nindang anak, she sings to the child.
dinding. 1. (M.) Wall, partition: ia beban ngaga' d. rumah, he is cutting planks for the wall of his house; rumah sida' be-d. papan, their house is walled with planks; ia ninding rumah, he built the walls of the house; d. (or tisi) belayar, end wall of longhouse (or position of bilik at the end) whose owner is responsible or its condition and for the steps there; d. penyurai, 'front' wall next the open verandah (tanju'); d. udok, room wall between the two tempuan and joining the tiang pemun, with a door in it for each bilik; d. antara, wall dividing from another; d. luan (or, sabar ai'), 'back' wall of room. Ledger or rail in a wall, kepan, pak. 2. Protect, defend: ia ninding diri' ari penyalah ia, he tried to exculpate himself; be-d., (make a protective wall) conduct the shielding rite, in which the manang rubs the with a talisman (engkerabun) to render him invisible to evil spirits and so cure him of recurring bad dreams. 3. Jealous, suspicious: ia ninding laki ia, she is jealous of her hus- band; ia ninding aku enggau laki ia, she is suspicious of me on account of her husband; ninding ngapa ', adat law offence of upsetting people by expressing or implying suspicions which, upon public investigation, are found to be groundless. 4. Niki'd., be or become deli-rious, TIKI': nuan apin nemu niki'd., you are not old enough to go with women. 5. D. hari, painted bow or stem decoration on a boat (PERAU').
dinga. (M. dengar) Hear: d.-ka, listen; aku ninga letup senapang saberai tadi', I heard a shot across river just now; nuan enda' tau' enda' ningaka aku, you must listen to me. Ear, pending.
dinggai. Dingga-d., very high up: d. pucok tapang nya ', the top of that tapang tree is very high; burong inggap d. ba pucok kayu', the bird perched high up at the top of the tree.
dinggil. Dingga-d., high up (and like to fall): ia bediri d. ba pala ' tangga ', he is perched dangerously at the top of the ladder.
dingkong. Trigger guard of a gun (SENA-PANG).
dini. 1. (stress on -ni or shortened to NI) Where? di-m?: d. endur nuan diau? where do you live?; d. ia? where is he?; d.-d. kambut aku? where on earth is my (betel) pouch?; d.-d. nuan diau aku ngusong nuan, wherever you are living I will come to you. 2. (stress on di-) Early hours: d.-liari, at break of day, just before first light; d.-hari dalam, in the small hours (3—4 a.m.); d.-hari mabu', before dawn (5—6 a.m.).
dio. 1. (Eng.) DO, District Officer. 2. Radio, wireless, redio, wailis.
dipang. For TIPANG, woody climber.
diri. (M.) Stand, uphold, erect, cause to stand: anak aku baru tau' be-d. (or nirika diri'), my child is just able to stand; ia be-d. aba pala' tangga', he stands at the top of the steps; d.-ka jari nuan, raise your hand; agi' sida' ka'nirika sandong, they will set up the (Kenyalang) pole before long; tiang ambis di-pe-d.-ka sida', they have put up all the posts (cf. entak); kami enda' tau' enda' niri negika bansa diri', awakka enda' ngining bansa bukai, we must estab-lish ourselves so well that we have no need to envy other races; peniri, warp threads in weaving.
diri'. (M., diri) Self, oneself, d. empu (em-phatic): aku enda' nemu d. di-akal orang, I didn't realise I had been cheated; ia enda' nemu d. empu sakit, he didn't know that he himself was sick; ia pulai ngagai menoa d., he went back to his own country; ia ngasoh anak d. ngereja nya', he got his own child to do that; ia ringatka d., she was angry with herself, angry for nothing; sida' nadai nemu nyaupka pangan d., they are not the sort to help each other (their own friends); aku enda' nemu d. agi', I was at a complete loss, I was as if stunned. 2. Ka-d., alone, on one's own, (or ke-d.): siduai udah ka-d., they have set up (house) on their own. When a young couple can build a new bilik and have been given a share of the padi pun (sacred rice), ritual stones (batu umai), and other property, they can separate both physically and formally from the parent bilik and are said to become (nyau) ka-d. 
Dising. An antu, son of ABU.
ditu'. Here, in this place, di (endur) tu '.
diu'. Crackle or Talking Mynah Gracula religiosa Linn., tiong.
dlm. Abbreviation of dalam, in.
dobi. (Hind., dhobi) Wash clothes, laundry, basu' gari'.
doh. Groan, demoh, (ioxadoh?).
dom. Term of address to a lad, dum: cf. wat, 'jang.
domba. (Pers., dunbah) (Bible only) Sheep, lamb: gen. kambin.
Dor. for DAU, name of a river.
dosa. (Skr.) (Bible only) Sin.
dua. (M.) Two: ke-d., second; d.-belas, 12; d.-puloh, 20; hart d., Tuesday; bulan d. (Perin- tah), February; kami bejalai d.-d. benmbai, we walked two abreast, DUAI (both), PEDUA' (divide).
duah. D.-d., roar: jugarn d.-d., the bear roared; indai ia d.-d., his mother made a hullabaloo.
duai. 1. Both, the two: si-d. (nya'), those two; si-d. (ia), the two of them; si-d. laki-bini, that couple (those two man and wife); kami d. cmpu nya', that belongs to both of us, DUA. 2. Spouse of brother- or sister-in-law (not other-wise related): cf. ipar, menyadi'.
duat. A name of Bungai Nuing.
dudi. (Jav., udi) After, last, follow after or behind: ia datai d. ari aku (or, ia ngentudi aku), he arrived after me; ia (datai) d. endar, he (comes, is) very late; d. hari, some other (day) time, later on; Pengiran Metali selalu ngenudika bala Raja, Pengiran Metali always brings up the rear of the Rajah's army; bejalai dulu' nuan, aku d., you go first, I'll follow after; anang ngenudika diri', don't lag be-hind; sida' datai be-penudi, they straggled in. Before, dulu '.
dudok. 1. (M.) Sit, sit down: d. nuan di bangku, sit on the bench; ia nudokka diri', he seated himself; sida' nudokka pengabang, they seated the guests; penudok, a seat. Ways of sitting: bejagang, squat with heels off the ground; bejangga', with one leg folded and the other knee cocked up; bejugang, kneeling on one knee; beragau, dedangkang, kneel or crawl on all fours; besila, kneel with feet and knees together; jeringgang, squat on heels; minggan, cross-legged; minggil (inggil), astride; nyerung- kong, nyeringgong, with knees up and arms around "them; pelekang, pikah (mikah), with legs apart; nyangah, pipi', with both feet to one side (as women do). 2. Establish, fix in a place, start, settle or live in: apai aku nudokka kedai, my father started a shop; fa nudokka lay a ', he started the quarrel; apai ti' dulu ' be-d. diau ditu', (my) father (it was who) first lived here; ia nudokka injin padi dia', he set up the padi mill there; nudokka saut, first part of the saut rites. 3. Low, low-growing, squat: wi d., kind of rotan, BUBU d., trap for small fish.
dudul. Quill of porcupine, bulu LANDAK.
dudus. Under part of fish's stomach, fish- maw, human stomach when distended: d. ikan jelawat nyamai dempa', the maw of the jela- uiat fish is delicious to eat.
duga'. D.-d., fixed, dugu.
dugal. (M., 'nausea') Sudden and acute pain, colic (as from gallstone),jugal.
dugau. 1. D.-d., idle, doing nothing, ibok; aku nugau nganti' nuan, I hung about waiting for you. 2. Meditating, dreaming, idle and slow to react (esp. of the aged). Cf. jugau.
dugok. Peak of mountain, puncak.
dugu-dugu. Motionless, fixed: batu d. benong ai', a rock stands in midstream; nugu, quiet, settled in one place.
dui-dui. Ia nyabak d., she is crying bitterly: cf. dedui.
duih. 1. Dara D., wife of KEMPING PADI, brother of Keling who lives in Sebayan: (for dui-dui?). 2. (Swk. M.) Ikan d., marine fish, Pomfret Stromateus spp.
duit. (D., doit) Coin, money, cash, small change, WANG: d. keretas, currency notes; d. RINGGIT, silver dollar, florin; d. sa-puloh, ten-dollar note; d. sa-ringgit, one-dollar note; d. sen, one-cent piece; d. siling, (Eng. shilling) silver coin, esp. 20-cent piece; mata d., royalty (as on minerals won); aku nadai d., I have no money; aku nadai be-d. agi', amhis kena' melt utai, I've no money left as I spent it all in buying things; ia be-d., he is well off; be-d. meda' gambar tu'? do we have to pay to see this film-show?; d. ke ulih (sida') ari ti' muka' main wayang, the proceeds (takings, net profit) from (their) organizing a theatrical show. One of the first measures of James Brooke as Rajah was the introduction of a standard currency to assist trade. The smallest copper coin was 14 cent: by 1940 it was the lA cent and since 1946 it has been the 1 cent, worth then about a farthing.
dujoh. 1. Diarrhoea, BIRA' pancar, jaran: ia pedis perut d., he suffers (stomach pain from) diarrhoea; makai enda' tentu nujohka ia, carelessness over what he ate gave him diar-rhoea. 2. Pour (water) over: ia nujoh jari aku enggau ai', he poured water over my hands.
dujong. 1. Flowers or leaves worn in the hair (or on a load) as ornaments: ia be-d. bangkit, she is wearing scented leaves (or flowers) in her hair. 2. (in Baleh) An edible fungus, KULAT taun. 3. D. bungai baya, common riparian shrub with large leaf and spike or cone of scarlet flowers, unid. 4. D. sahari, 'flower of a day', given to SIMPI IM- PANG by Antu Ribut as a 'fine' for blowing away his ensabi (or padi) seed, unid. (prob. a riddle name).
duju. Nuju, knock against, push over or aside: ia ngabi tebang ia, udah nya' ia nuju enggau kayu' besai, he undercut his trees and brought them down with a big tree (felled to fall against them); kayu' rebah nuju langkau, a tree fell and struck the hut; aku bediri ba moa pintu, ia datai lalu nuju, I was standing in the doorway and he came and pushed me aside; belangkah tengah kerangan enda' tau' enda' di-d. ai' bah, pacing up and down on the middle of a gravel-bed one is sure to be swept off by a flash-flood (of careless confidence). When clearing forest, it is usu. to undercut the trees working uphill; and then fell (TEBANG) a big tree at the top to bring the whole hillside down at a run without more labour.
dujul. Nujul, put the end of something against: anang nujulka kayu' ba pagar, don't put the log with its end on the fence; ia nujulka sena- pang ngagai aku, he stuck the gun in my ribs; ia nujul aku enggau api, he touched me with something burning (e.g., a cigarette); ia dulu' nujul aku, baru aku malu'ia, he shoved me first and then I hit him.
duku'. (M., parang) Broad heavy knife used as tool or weapon, 'bush-knife', 'matchet', sword; distinct from dikin, geruga' (smaller), beliong (adze), kapak (axe), lungga' ('penknife'): num. cl., bilah. Parts are: butoh kunding, notch next the hilt; daun, blade\gerening, hilt rings; Itilum, boss (or band, S.) on hilt; mata, cutting edge; puting, tip, point; sarong, sheath, scabbard; temurak, plaited band on hilt; tunjal, part of hilt into which the tang is fixed with malau; ulu, hilt. Kinds of d. arc: d. amat, with swept- back pointed blade; andong or candong, heavy with broad blunt tip; apang, a Kayan sword; bayu, as jimpul; cenangkas, (M.) straight edged sword; gulok, (M.) short sword; Hang, Kayan sword straight and pointed, with the left flat side concave and the right convex (as seen from' the back edge); impong, a sword like andong; isau, ancient type of sword; jimpul, (M.) keliwang, heavy sword blunt-tipped and decorated; langgai tinggang, a light nyabur; malat, short, unid.; menyangin, (poet.) unid.; nyabur, Iban sword proper, straighter than d. amat; PEDANG, foreign sword usu. with cross-hilt; d. rantong, damascened sword (obs.); senangkas, suai, (cenangkas), long light nyabur; d. tebas, like d. amat but long and light for clearing undergrowth or broad and heavy for clearing swamp grass; tilan, long impong. When a sword is sharpened, the water used on the stone is a lotion against boils. A d. is slung at the waist with cord or plaited rotan, cutting edge uppermost in the sheath. The hilt is worn in front of the body so that it cannot catch in undergrowth and is close to the sword hand.
dukun. (Jav.) Shaman, manang, (gen.) herbalist or healer, user of western medicine: lutor, doctor; derisa, dresser.
dulang. 1. (M.) Wooden trough: babi aku makai be-d.-ka teras, my pigs eat from an iron- wood trough; tukang kamboh ngena' d. mit nyepohka duku' aku, the blacksmith used a small trough to temper my knife in. Cf. talam, tray. 2. D. SELEMPANDAI, d. gayu, caudate lobe of liver (ATAU): (fig.) d. selempandai, vulva.
dulau. For dulu', before.
dulu'. 1. (M., dahulu) Before, first: be-d., go before (as guide); ia datai d. ari aku, he. arrived before me; anang guai d., wait a moment; ditu' pen d., (I'll stay) here awhile first; aku (beja-d. luban jalat repa', nuan dudi, I'll go first because the path is overgrown, you follow behind; ia nulu'-ka bala, he leads the army; anang ngenulu'-ka diri', don't rush ahead; balat penulu' nuan, you are very early, ahead of the others; kita' datai anang be-penulu', you must come all together. After, dudi. 2. D. jaga', d. kelia', formerly, of old, a long time ago: d. kelia' menoa tu' kacau, in the old days this district was in a disturbed state (i.e., from raids, kayau).
dum. Term of address for a lad or a son-in-law, dom: cf. wat, 'jang.
duman. 1. (Jav., dum) Share, divide, ampit, bedua': ikan tu' d. aku, this fish is my share; aku gawa' be-d. jani', I am busy dividing out the pork: cf. bagi, ungkup. 2. (poet.) Lair or den of wild beast.
dumbak. Drum, esp. those about 2' x 1' and cylindrical with skin at each end as the Melanau use, GENDANG.
dumbang. 1. Short-tailed Mongoose Her- pestes spp., esp. II. bracliyurus rajah Thomas. It has a loud cackling 'laugh'. 2. Bujang D., a great drinker and settler of disputes in Pang- gau. He was cured of lusong by bathing in the river at Keling's house, when he went there at the invitation of Bungai Nuing to settle a case of adultery. He had found two snakes (tedong and kesiran) coiling together in his farm the year before, and had chopped their tails off. When he produced the 'tails' they had become hair, which was shown to have come from the heads of Kurhang and her suspected lover and so the case was proved.
dundong. 1. Two or more of a kind together: talun dua be-d., two roped swings (for man-ang); rumah kami be-d., our houses are (alike and) together; nundong, put side by side, DANDANG, GEMBAR. 2. Nundong, support, prop against oneself (as someone ill).
dundun. Coucal (BUBUT) from the sound it makes at dawn, (poet.) d. dara nyedan (the sobbing maiden).
dunga'. (Sit) facing someone, lunga', (dudok) be-tunga 'moa.
dungai. Love song, sanggai, pelandai, pantun.
dungan. Freshwater fish, unid.
dunggul. Cock's comb, hump of cattle (capi): ia nunggul manok ia, he trims (the points off) the comb of his fighting cock; langit Petara dulu ' mibit mesai d. manok banda, Petara first shaped (bibit, pinch) the heavens the size of the comb of a red cockerel: wattles,gambir.
Dunging. A man of Nanga Ulai (Bayor, Rim- bas) who became known about 1950 for his invention of a syllabary of 77 characters, with 31 simplified forms. He taught some people of his house to use it. He also experimented with making coins, building estate roads, and using water power.
dungkong. 1. Excrescence or bulge, esp. of the head: d. kening ia balat endar, he has a high forehead; pala' ia be-d., the back of his head is rounded. 2. man's or woman's name.
dungku. Tree, PERAH.
dungu-dungu. Sullen: nama kabuali nuan d.? why are you looking so sullen?
dungun. Small coastal tree Heritiera littoralis Dry. It bears a phallus-like (butoh) fruit and yields a tough hard wood from which mortars (lesong) are made. Gen. name, melebu.
dunjong. 1. Heap, jutnboh, tugong: d. padi ia basah, his heap of padi is wet; surat be-d. ba bilik ia, there are piles of books in his room; anang nunjongka kayu' dia', don't pile the firewood there. 2. Dry measure of 20 PASU.
dunju'. Small temporary hut or shelter, da- ngau, jungap: tu'd. alai aku nebas, this is the hut I use when clearing the scrub.
dunya. 1. (M.) The world, this life: sida' ia diau merihsa ' di d. tu ', they lead a wretched existence. 2. The land of the living, this world, as distinct from LANGIT and SEBAYAN. To-gether these form a universe that may be likened to an hour-glass or three-dimensional figure of eight, with Langit above, Sebayan below, and this world in the middle.
dupan. (of pigs) Very large and with long curved tusks: (poet.) taring BABI cl., the curling tusk of a great boar.
durah. Babi dura-di. nanka anak, the sow is making a lot of noise to defend her litter.
duran. Set of amulets (batu, pengaroh) or the place or container (keban, lupong) where they are kept: ia ngibun d. kami, he watches over our amulets: (fig.) sapa ngibun d. sa-han tu '? who i^-staying to guard the hut today?.
duri'. 1. (M.) Thom, spike: bisi' mulong ke be-d., bisi' ke enda', some kinds of sago palm have thorns, some have not; davoai d., barbed wire, UNAK. 2. Small spined shrimp (undang), Mimocarpus heterocarpoides.
durian. 1. (M.) Trees Durio spp. (Malvaceae), with large spiky (be-duri') fmit. 2. D. isa, tree of Coelostegia sp. which has inedible fruit but yields a preservative dye (samak): d. belanda, Sour-sop Anona muricata. RIAN.
durok. Help one another in turn, give reci-procal aid, work together, ari: kami be-d. turun, we work each other's farms in turn; ia nurok aku ngetau, he joined with me for the reaping; umai aku enda' ulili di-pe-d.-ka, laban jauh ari pangan, I can't get help on my farm be-cause it is too isolated; baka keli' baka candas, baka d. baka balas, as the keli' fish is like the candas, so helping one's neighbour is only paying a debt. Be-d., a system of labour ex-change, is usu. among relatives where the whole group works for each participant in turn; e.g., during the padi cycle or in house building when the work is too heavy or urgent for one bilik on its own. The recipient of the labour pro-vides one nee meal for all in the course of the day's work. Communal effort and self-help for non-traditional purposes is now called gutong ruyong.
durong. 1. (Br. M.) Padi store or granary built separate from house for safety (likun). 2. Raja D., the great padi planter who lived in Sumatra and is 'ancestor' of Lang, PULANG GANA, and others. He is called Lumpong Tibang Baring, the roll of (bark that makes) a padi bin. His wife is called Endu Darn Talun PELANGKA', kuta dinding hari, the maiden of the threshing frame (that is like) a fort with painted walls; Endu Cerembang Ceremin Bintang, tukoli lawang pinggai bekaki, she of the starred threshing sieve (made in) the shape of a broad dish with feet. 3. A 'son' of Pulang Gana, called D. Sukong Lamba' (ka) Jinggau, ngelam- bongka burit tibang bepunca', D. the support (made) of hard heartwood of jinggau measured and laid for the floor of the coloured padi bin. His wife is Endu Kumang Tengkuang Tangkai Padi, tumboh di tisi jalai raya, the Lady Ku-mang of the swan neck, (slender and curved as the) ripening padi that grows beside the way (i.e., between this world and that of Pulang Gana where they live). She is also called Endu Sibabut Rumput Laman, renga-rengai ngambu' diri' berimbai enggau tangkai bungai sangga, she who crops the grass beside the house (?), for ever crying out to claim a place beside the flowering sangga. 4. Dura-d., roaring (as a fierce fire): dura-d. munyi api, tentu angus umai sida', there is a roar in that fire, their farm must be burning well (i.e., to consume all the felled timber).
Dusun. The D. people of Sabah.
dut. Thud, throbbing sound, sound of a gong (tawak) esp. when 'stopped' with the free hand: be-ke-d. munyi bubut si-tawak begau, throbbing like the call of a coucal, a gong sounding the alarm; aku ninga d. kapal, I heard the throb of a launch (engine); ia sakit d.-d., he is moaning (at regular intervals) in his illness.
duyong. (M.) Sea-cow or Dugong Dugong dugon Mueller.
Dyak. Former spelling of DAYA', Dayak.
